coming up next book TV presents
afterwards an hour-long interview
program where we invite guests hose to
interview authors this week Tom Hayden
founding member of students for a
Democratic Society and former California
State Senator talks about his book
writings for a Democratic Society the
book collects mr. hayden's pieces on
various social and political issues that
he is engaged in since the early 1960s
from his opposition to the Vietnam War
to his more recent work on gang violence
mr Hayden is interviewed by John Weiner
professor of history at university of
california irvine professor weiners
books include historians in trouble and
gimme some truth the John Lennon FBI
files most recently is the editor of
conspiracy in the streets the
extraordinary trial the Chicago 84 which
Tom Hayden wrote the foreword at tom you
were a writer before you were a
political activist what was your
starting point as a writer I've always
been a writer one doesn't know where
things begin but I was I guess I had
some need to be heard and the adults the
teachers the authorities weren't
listening to me or to us so that would
have been a starting point and I guess I
found it easy to learn writing who what
when where why that's the first
paragraph that you're taught the
structure of first paragraph in
journalism so I went to took journalism
classes in high school and we had an
underground paper this is in the 50s it
was like it was modeled after mad
magazine ok and and we had an overground
paper which is the school paper and
we're in the United States are we a nice
is a suburb of suburb of Detroit called
royal oak
and the big secret which I didn't learn
until a couple of years ago when a
graduate student uncovered it was that
the town was among the first suburbs and
it was racially sealed as a white suburb
by secret covenant so so I was a writer
I was a sports writer because that was
what was available and I liked sports
and then I became the editor of the
paper and I think also I was a
nonconformist so the nonconformity led
me towards critical journalism and and
also in time towards activism but if
there's something about one's nature it
writing would come first for me not
politics or the rest and then what what
changed your mind about the kind of
writing you want to do what led you to
leave the objective mode of who what why
and when and become the the advocate the
pamphleteer the movement writer well
there was no movement so with journalism
there were two choices there was you
wrote editorials all very pompous role
telling everybody what to think and then
you wrote news which was objective and
obviously there's more than those two
choices but it took some time for me to
realize that so I started to get
interested in interpretive writing
investigative writing that was less than
a commitment to activism but I started
writing about activism I went to the
went to the Bay Area in 1960 and I wrote
about the growth of the student movement
there which completely shocked my
administration back in Ann Arbor because
they thought that this news would spread
like some kind of contagion which it did
I guess
and then I went to the Democratic
convention here in Los Angeles and just
as August 1960 aeon Martin Luther King
was marching for a civil rights platform
plank and I went and I interviewed him
on the March and the effect it had on me
was I realized that I was in it for the
ambition for the Thomas Haden byline and
he was in it for much deeper reasons and
I think at that point I was I began
thinking about whether i should stop
writing about action but take action and
and i had an interesting rationale I
thought which was consistent with being
a writer the the theory was that only by
taking action sometimes can you create
evidence that wasn't there before about
whether something is going to happen or
not so keeping yourself out of it was
lessening the possibilities of the
action and taking place with a positive
outcome and so I thought I'm I'm I mean
I'm caught I this is it to be on the
sidelines to be objective is to
contribute a little more to the
establishment than to the activists to
get involved I risk losing my critical
objective abilities so then the question
became well how can I get involved fully
and still retain a certain kind of
independence and I don't think I've
moved much beyond that position was 50
years ago 40 50 years ago yeah Jerry
Brown once told me the the Jesuits had
this idea of contemplation in action
that that was their discipline that
comes close to it sociologists would
call it
a participatory observation participant
observer being a participant observer I
guess you could call it participatory
writing for a participatory society but
it's it's um it's not easy to resolve
and I noticed that that in this book of
writings going back over 50 years up
till now till the Iraq I tend to be more
comfortable being a narrator but my
experience in social movements I feel
gives me an invaluable edge over
observers historians newspaper reporters
because I've been there I am there I've
done that I know what that feels like
and so I have a better ability to
evaluate what's going to happen I think
then somebody who has only observed but
it's it's a marginal difference now
you're your best known mmm your best not
in this let's call it early period for
the Port Huron Statement which was kind
of the defining document of the student
movement the new left in the United
States but even before the Port Huron
Statement you were you were sort of a
becoming a more engaged writer write uh
how did that happen and I know you you
the the book has some examples of these
pre port huron bustle right i was sent
by a student for democratic society to
the south for fifty bucks a week i lived
in georgia I was in love and she was a
civil rights worker for the YWCA out of
Austin and she too was a writer and a
poet and so
I think I saw my task as a Tom Paine
kind of pamphleteer I will observe
people fighting for their lives risking
their lives in the worst parts of
Mississippi and then i'll publish the
pamphlet and I'll tour northern cities
and campuses and I'll speak about what
I've what I've seen so the pamphleteer
phase in your your book that Tom Hayden
reader has some examples of your writing
from those early days I wonder if you
could ask us to if you could read us a
sample I think port urine is more famous
it might read you the the the first
sentence of port here sure give you this
no there's a strange sense of how
unorthodox I was as an advocate who they
wanted me to stir it up a little bit but
my first sentence was we are people of
this generation bred in at least modest
comfort house now in universities
looking uncomfortably to the world we
inherit not exactly the Communist
Manifesto it says you can see that
that's kind of a distant writing but
people seem to think that it did speak
for them now the the youthful idealism I
wrote something in Mississippi and 61
that was called the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee in action it was
about a killing and some demonstrations
but the subtitle dignity for the
enslaved and for us all so you can see
this robust romantic thing but earlier
in 61 I wrote a preliminary for the port
here in statement and I I can't tell if
it's sophomoric or it's it's not
embarrassing but it's it's it's let's go
for it it's a young person's right
what is desperately needed i think is
the person of vision and clarity who
sees both the model society and the
pitfalls that precede its attainment and
who will not destroy his vision for
short run gains but instead hold it out
for all to see as the furthest dream and
perimeter of human possibility vision
and clarity I sounds great too that's
right and there's one other part of this
that i thought was noteworthy in terms
of the how these movements developed
because they were so different than the
movements that were built around isms
great faith and so on and i am beset by
doubt at this point some perhaps are we
all we doubt our ability to affect
change we doubt our ability to
understand enough we doubt the validity
of time-honored liberal notions we doubt
the right and wrong of it and I don't
recommend that we banished out not that
there where there's a will there's a way
but I would suggest that it is possible
and necessary to think and act
provisionally yet strongly in the midst
of our doubts we must begin to see doubt
not as a reason for inaction but as a
reminder of our FAL ability fantastic I
think there's some bad influence here I
think it's good so a thank you very much
for that reading the Port Huron
Statement 1962 it was published to say
right it was written it was drafted at
the end of 61 it was circulated in the
spring of 62 and it was published by
mini a graft meehans for 25 cents a copy
i think in june 62 this would be for
Kennedy was assassinated yo before civil
rights had become quite mainstream
before the march on Washington before
the betty Friedan book about women's
libber
eration it was still a period that I
think of and anybody that went through
it as a period of that beautiful
innocence that James Joyce wrote about
in the portrait of the artist it's
really you can't understand the sixties
without understanding this brief utopian
moment well I want to ask you more about
that one moment because the Port Huron
Statement has turned out to be a
incredibly important historical document
if there is a manifesto of the student
movement of the first part of the 60s
that's it was and I remember when it
came out it was just incredibly eloquent
and a visionary a call on students to
move away from apathy and out towards
participatory democracy you called it
this is the writing of a very young
person how are you able to write
something so eloquent in so visionary at
such a young age well I think that you
write differently when you're young when
you're middle-aged and more experienced
when you're old you're looking back and
I don't rank them as more or less
important but yeah this is the writing
of an of an inspired a group of people
like myself and it came from a
combination of what we had what we had
seen in terms of the apathy all around
us and the utter apathy of the suburbs
from which we came versus the bravery
and courage of young people our age
nearly all of them black in the South
who were standing up and doing something
about their oppression and and I think
it takes that friction you know between
your surface reality and what's starting
to happen it sparks a creativity and if
it rang true to people I think it's
because it was simply a cycling back to
the audience what they already knew or
coming to know because they were
starting to awaken it wasn't a foreign
set of ideas dropped on them to to learn
and study study groups or something like
that and how important was it that this
was a statement of a group not just that
one one writer the the value of having
one person principal author is you get a
certain consistency consistency of tone
and style yes which it definitely had
and then and then the value of a group
is that you'd get much more buy-in and
participation and a sense of ownership
that this is about us we we created this
vision the downside of that is it can
become more clunky as things are at it
I'll tell you a funny example that that
didn't really harm it I I had written in
the section on the economy that we that
I had a we I think it was all couched as
we were supportive of small innovative
businesses community businesses and then
my draft would go to a group that SAT
around in the grass and and read and
argued and kind of rewrote it not
stylistically but as if it was a
constitutional proposal with amendments
well right and so Rob berlitch who's
still active in health care in New York
City and was then the editor of the
student paper in Austin Texas many of us
were campus editors he brought back his
group's revisions of the economic
section and said the amendment number
one is an amendment by brother Karl Marx
to brother Tom Hayden's draft on the
economy may I forget it really didn't go
beyond you know kind of uh
waterdown democratic socialism public
ownership of key assets of the economy
but it eliminated the reference to small
business good supplement here you loot
you gain you lose when you collectivize
the writing effort now the Port Huron
Statement didn't just come out of a
political moment it also came out of a
world of writing other articles other
authors you were also an intellectual as
well as an activist who were the
intellectuals who you were on your mind
that's a good question that the 60s are
remembered very much of through our
projections and not in their totality
they're there to their totality the the
example I have in mind that is that it
was an inspiring moment in religion
particularly the opening in the Catholic
Church patcham and terrace the coming of
a Catholic president for the first time
in the United States and the civil
rights movement in the south was a
largely a church-based movement with
heavy Jewish support from the north and
the most lasting impact was called
liberation theology which was growing
through community organizing in base
communities among the peasantry in Latin
America and Central America it was a
very powerful movement and for a time it
became the majority movement in the
Catholic Church officially sanctioned in
1968 as a matter of fact and the Port
Huron Statement has to be located there
there's a spirituality to the Port Huron
Statement a there's a sense of values
there's language that's very reminiscent
of these early Catholic teachings the
linkage between you know liberation in
the hair and that in the here and now as
well as you know in the larger scheme of
eternity and I don't remember the
sequence but I think Port Heron came
first but there was a woman named Mary
varela
who became a Latina organizer around
health issues and still is in northern
New Mexico she was very influential but
at the time she was with the young
Catholic Worker I think that was the
name of it and she had some of the
writings of the church in her pocket or
her purse that she carried around with
her and people were seen in small groups
comparing you know the the language
because we had to make a decision on
what we thought was human nature itself
big big question yeah you don't want to
leave that out of a manifesto and we
thought that the the view of niebuhr and
some of the you know the darker view of
views of human nature led into a sort of
political economy that was based on
fencing people in and to the Federalist
Papers notion of containing the egos and
preventing selfish interests from
arising and we thought that was counter
pose to liberation which meant the
audacity of hope shall we say go tell
you and we were on that side of that
argument although of course throughout
it all I remained doubtful of all the
basics but there there was some by
osmosis or other means there was some
linkage between the stirrings at Port
Huron in that statement and what was
going on in other parts of the world and
what was going on in religious
institutions that that is usually
forgotten fascinating well the next big
chapter in the the work of Tom Hayden as
an author is the your writings about
work into work you would go on to no
work to do community organizing part of
the SDS strategy newark as they say
exploded in 1967 massive unimaginable
uprising you were in the middle of all
that and the New York Review asked you
to write about it this was a 90,000 word
peace which was published in The New
Yorker view with a very exciting cover I
think it's the longest piece the New
York Review has ever published in its
50-year history how did this come to be
and what was that piece like my
reflection is that my writing may have
changed in terms of melamine are
deepening over 50 years but it's it's
pretty much the same and it becomes well
known writing or that it finds a mass
outlet only if that's useful to the
editors of publications who are the
arbiters of what's politically correct
or culturally interesting so in 1967 the
New York Times chose to write a column
about me that said Thomas Emmett Hayden
pragmatic radical very promising young
man i guess that meant and so I became
kind of like an icon of the new left
because all phenomenon have to have two
things have found in manifesto and a
leader we didn't think so but that
wasn't up to us it's like the same media
establishment named The Beat Generation
The Beat Generation they named the
hippies the hippies and so on so I was
named and then it happened that I was
right in the center of this Newark
rebellion and violence 20 26 people
killed hundreds injured and I was one of
the only people who was again recording
the whole thing I was right there I saw
people shot I talked in media you'd
already been there for years so I've
been knocking on doors I knew people you
had an easy as a name I remember that's
right i had acts
therefore today to the lower depths of
the ghetto where most of the events took
place and so I was a source grand jury
subpoenaed me they threatened me they
try to take my notes and I don't
remember how it went but I had a meeting
in the middle of the night with the
Governor of New Jersey and the leader of
the core chapter Bob Kervin and we
argued and negotiated to get the troops
to leave much like Vietnam and they did
leave in the morning partial withdrawal
but for whatever for whatever reason I
got noticed and and I got asked by the
New York Review to to write a piece and
I sat on a rooftop in New York and I
just chopped it out a theory of how it
happened and who died and so on no
snipers utterly predictable and they
published the whole thing and and and
the cop kind who I think he was an
editor of something at the time as SAT
with me and he asked me how Molotov
cocktails are made and I drew one on a
napkin and he took it to the editors and
they drew this bomb a Molotov cocktail
and they put it on the cover of this
magazine so was this with Eurasian ille
with your name under it well it was Tom
Hayden rebellion in Newark by tom hayden
and then Random House published the
whole thing as a paperback book
immediately and it was not that my
writing was any better or any worse it
was at that moment I was the man I've
noticed this over 50 years where you go
like this and then you'll rise and fall
and wonder what's happening and a lot of
it i think is out of our hands doesn't
have anything to do with the quality of
your work so what happened with that
piece oh it's been used in Special
Forces training academies for the US
Army riot control who knows it's never
been republished you can get it online
community standard work in the history
of urban insurrections which we've had
many of in the past century after World
war one world war 2 60's and it was just
an attempt to make sense of why these
things happen and to argue against the
notion that they're unpredictable
chaotic mob violence with no discernible
pattern no logic to it we wanted to say
yeah there's a logic to this because we
wanted to get it over with one of the
troops to leave and we had to predict
the officials that the violence would go
down that it had come to a point where
it was only the occupation by the
military that was causing the violent
reaction from the youth and if you
removed the military the community
wanted it was exhausted they wanted to
heal they wanted to they had to go back
to work they were losing their jobs are
being thrown out of school so the book
was an attempt to make sense of what
most people prefer to believe is like
senseless rioting 90,000 word peace on
the cover of the New York Review of
Books and yet you did not become a New
York Review regular and when I was an
activist I was a leader of anti-war and
student struggles I didn't think of
myself as wanting to be a New York
Review regular I was pleased and still
in pleased that there was space for this
eyewitness account mm-hmm it wasn't my
writing necessarily it was that I was
the eyewitness there was no other
documentation like this I was there I
was an organizer there and I had the
information on how these 20 or 25 people
were killed but I didn't get any
subsequent offers if anything I was I
don't want to sound self-pitying I was
shunned by the New York Review and and I
think it's simply because certain people
came to believe that the new left had
become too radical too far out too
sympathetic to violence and shouldn't be
encouraged it wasn't me that put a
Molotov cocktail recovered I think they
were having a flirtation with violin
I knew very well what violence was about
I I had seen that firsthand and but I
think I've always had that trouble I
there's not there's not a lot of space
in American writing for people who
attempt to explain violence well we need
to talk about your writings about
Vietnam and the Chicago conspiracy trial
but first we need to take a short break
afterwards and several other c-span
programs are available for download as
podcast visit book TV org more with Tom
Hayden and John Wiener in a moment
retirement deficits are approaching one
trillion dollars former Wall Street
Journal columnist Roger Lowenstein
argues that pension concessions like
those offered in the past by General
Motors and the New York City Transit
System are the cause he looks at our
current financial future and present
steps to secure the retirement of
workers in while America aged while
America aged sunday at five fifteen p.m.
on c-span tues book TV afterwards with
tom hayden and john weiner continues
when we think of the sixties of course
we think of vietnam you were one of the
key leaders of the anti-war movement you
went to Vietnam at the height of the
American bombing and you wrote about
that too let's talk about that well
that's another example where the trip to
Hanoi was an act of civil disobedience
it was technically in violation of the
State Department's laws and regulations
and there was a challenge on the table
and the the government chose not to try
to indict us or imprison us and
in addition to it being an act it was an
attempt to break through a barrier
because there had been no coverage of
Vietnam nobody knew who the enemy was
nobody knew north from South Viet Cong
from mounts a tongue and and so my
purpose was to write and I went with a
member of the American Communist Party
Herbert AB Dekker because he was able to
make an arrangement with the North
Vietnamese Communist Party and with my
friends from civil rights days professor
Staunton Lind a Quaker whose parents
were sociologists and American
Historians so so staunton and I wrote a
book attempting to describe what we
called the other side and as I look at
it it seems to be overly romanticized
but the the purpose i think was the same
to to bring people in this country in
connection with the other with the we
have others who are always excluded from
the mainstream politics and culture as
if they can be handled by napalm in them
or erasing them or keeping us ignorant
of them as opposed to dialogue so that
was the idea and and I never would have
thought that 10 years of my life would
be spent knowing Vietnam I had some kind
of fatigue because I just went back to
Vietnam for the first time in 32 years
oh I brought my little boy I brought my
wife and I was in pursuit of what I
called the old revolutionaries I met
several people who are all in their 80s
who I had met first in 1965 just to see
how they were doing and and how life had
changed notes a country that's at peace
for the first time ever diplomatic
relations with the u.s. world trade
organization members proud to have
foreign investment and the average
person is about 16 or 18 years old so
they're interested in the
same gadgets and technology that our
kids are and the old revolutionaries
have the same problem of of trying to
get the kids to remember the past and
dwell on it a little bit and learn
lessons from it and it's a very young
country well it's shocking one of the
things I think I've learned is that
while you can write accurately and
authentically and movingly I'm not sure
that I or or many people who attempt it
are successful with their powers of
prediction do you know what I mean it is
nothing ever turns out the way that you
thought it was going to not Vietnam not
life so the next chapter of your life is
Chicago 68 the Democratic National
Convention you're one of the key
organizers of anti-war demonstrations
Nixon gets elected in November the you
you are indicted at the big issues Nixon
takes office one of the first things
they do is indict you and your fellow
organizers the trial takes up a big part
of your life at a big part of the
American five years that's right but is
I understand that you didn't write about
the trial at that point as far as i can
tell at least from the tom hayden reader
it wasn't really until you wrote your
memoir reunion that you really take on
the whole issue of the trial and what
the trial was right at the time i wrote
dispatches for a i think a defunct
left-wing paper in New York the National
Guardian we didn't have we had a few
underground papers that was it not much
on alternative radio and I did writing
again at the trial I had the same
schizophrenic experience of being in a
defendant an activist anti-war and I was
serving as basically the third lawyer I
was constantly interviewing witnesses
prepare
the defense and trying to analyze how
were we going to persuade the jury and
if that failed how were we going to lay
the foundation for an appeal how were we
going to succeed in what seemed to be a
very rigged judicial system so you were
busy I was busy but the writing was
actually it may be lost I don't know
where the I couldn't find it but I did I
did a lot of writing on the run and then
I did some writing looking back of
course and it's become extremely
important to get that record straight
because as you know we're in the 40th
anniversary of this event and it soon
will be in the 50th anniversary of
everything that happened in the 60s and
there's a fight going on you know was it
worth the battle should the legacy be
preserved was it all about nothing or
will some of us be remembered so that
others are forgotten their the
approaches to the two memory are not
outside of the the field of contestation
let's say so I think it's important we
keep engaged in the 50th anniversary of
the 60s so that we can die a natural
death many people have tried to kill us
before the 60s have been pronounced dead
but it's there it's quite alive and the
presidential campaign it's the life
everywhere so is keeping keeping some
faith with what happened and telling the
stories it's just as important as it was
getting people to register to vote it
seems to me they if their story isn't
told they're still voiceless so next
chapter vietnam war ends in 1975 the the
movement is in complete collapse at this
point
your old comrades go there different
ways sort of what's going to happen now
Jerry Rubin famously becomes a yuppie
Abbie Hoffman eventually gets indicted
for selling cocaine you made the
decision when Ed Davis hooks up with a
Indian the religious figure you made a
different decision which was to run for
office in the Democratic Party in
California to join the system as we
called it then this is a huge turning
point in your own political life and it
also turns out in your writing how did
you decide to take that turn well
everything gets characterized and
simplified a little bit I mean abbie
hoffman and jerry rubin and Randy Davis
were more than those reductionist
descriptions there was Dave Dellinger
who remained a lifetime pacifist very
active John Froines is a public health
specialist at UCLA bill Kunstler lived
on to fight many courtroom battles Len
Wein glass remains one of my great
friends today Lee whiner works in public
relations for progressive causes and and
I was I guess tagged as having entered
the system right and and I never thought
of that that way I thought of it as it
was an exhibit the 60s were over we had
won the big battles and that's why there
was so much confusion and the war was
over the draft had been eliminated and
so on and I wanted to know how far you
could take the Citizen Action and social
movement perspective into the
institutions before you were stopped was
it true that you would sell out or not
because we'd never been given the
opportunity and I've been banging on
these doors and it would seem a little
ridiculous if the doors open and you
said I never wanted
to enter this place if it's ever anyway
so I thought of it as an experiment
unfortunately perhaps it lasted 18 years
I was in office for a long time and I
think that this was the sort of the
responsible quote-unquote period of my
life where I had a gavel right I was
chairing committees all the time I in
public policy responsibilities and my
writing became a little more legalistic
and a little more advocacy writing with
a lot of pieces published in the LA
Times as op-eds on genetically
engineered food or the you know Orange
County financial scandal or the saving
the salmon from from extinction because
of pesticide use and and overfishing the
higher education becoming a racket would
so expensive that students were being
forced out financially all these issues
so the writing was tight was
programmatic here's the problem here's
the solution and then it was another
time when I was in demand so to speak in
the marketplace I could get op-ed pieces
published all the time I never would
have imagined that I would be in office
for 18 years but I was till 2000 mm-hmm
some would say the best years of your
life oh and the experiment was left
inconclusive well you accomplished a lot
and you also wrote a lot you got
involved with gangs and thinking about
gang violence at this time this was that
was the outer perimeter of the possible
remember the early essay i would say
that i had to sacrifice attention to
some controversial issues because there
didn't seem to be any it wasn't that I
was selling out so much as there wasn't
any traction or leverage there well so I
chose not to
take up the the the war on drugs for
example which i think is an expensive
counterproductive wedge issue that that
I should have taken up but because there
was no easy legislative solution I
couldn't get a bill out of committee I
let that slide the the exception and and
I'm not quite sure the explanation of it
I think it has to do with my roots in
newark in the south was I couldn't abide
the demonizing of all young people as
gang members all gang members as
murderers or potential murderers
suitable only for imprisonment that led
to California being the largest
incarceration center in the United
States and the United States having
twenty or thirty percent of the world's
inmates amazing in politics of law and
order were so successful politically
that we were creating these huge side
effects that will be with us so i tried
a lot of his any things i hired some
accident gang members on my staff I I I
tried to analyze programs that might
help transform these young people into a
positive and constructive rebels if they
were going to be rebels as opposed to
self-destructive and I think we had some
success I think we actually changed the
minds on the inside but but everybody
thought I was out of my mind politically
that they did not want to be tagged as
soft on gangs or using tax dollars to
hire ex-gang members even if they agreed
privately it was for a worthy purpose so
there I saw the limits of working within
the system good people but calculating
about what they had to do to survive and
excluding certain issues altogether as
somebody's business down the road but
not the kind of issues they wanted to
take up which meant if you didn't have
outside forces external crises you might
never get the attention of politicians
he had to make it something that their
constituencies care deeply about to get
them activated you wrote a book about
gangs and then you also got involved
with Ireland another place with a
history of violence Kyle make sense does
warfare your your Ireland books one of
my favorites well I got very interested
in Ireland because in the late 60s after
Chicago I felt like that had a lot of my
American identity beaten out of me yeah
and I had never been raised as an
irish-american I was I was a white young
man from the Midwest and and as the
identity got taken away the women took
their identity the blacks took their
identity that Chicanos took theirs what
was left was being a white man yeah
which pretty boring yeah it's not not
promising and so at just that moment I
saw on television the civil rights
marchers in Northern Ireland being hosed
gassed and arrested and they were
singing we shall overcome and and it's
it had a stunning effect on me and not a
born-again experience but stunning
stunning because I realized that this
was a missing part of my heritage and
that they knew more about ourselves than
I knew about them they were even
borrowing and embracing and
universalizing the song we shall
overcome so I became very very
interested I didn't think that my
identity had been lost and I could just
call up lost and found and get it back I
thought was more likely that it was
stolen in a subtle way gradually by my
parents trying to blend in the
university's discrediting any idea of
Irish civilization and
I searched that I tried to go to Ireland
and I was prevented from going there
because I was seen as a revolutionary
from America so it took me a long time
but then I I became very interested in
the beginnings of the peace process and
I renewed my old contacts from Ireland
and for about 10 years I led on an
additional life besides the legislature
and family life I was constantly
involved in trying to persuade the
Clinton administration and do the right
thing in Northern Ireland and constantly
involved in trying to work to promote
greater understanding of how there might
be a peace deal that could be negotiated
and once and for all move the island
forward and these were very very
important years I felt I was having
useful effects but it was also quite
important for my the reconstitution of
who I was and I wrote a couple of books
on the Irish Famine of the 1840s and
another one called Irish on the inside
it didn't get me anywhere in California
politics I should have lived in in
Boston New York Chicago or San Francisco
but in west LA people were just like
wondering what's with this guy yeah Tom
focus that sort of thing so eventually
you were termed out of the legislature
you didn't get to be the mayor of la
1999 you're no longer a lucky democratic
party official there's some
anti-globalization protel actually does
I was out in two thousand but well you
were still an elected leader showing a
sign some of my young friends the
children of the sixties generation came
to me and said Tom Seattle you have got
to go and what did this mean to you well
I gradually tried to incorporate what it
meant to me as a legislator and then
later in terms of social movements what
it meant is a legislature is that the
World Trade Organization
protocols took away from California
sovereignty over a lot of legislative
policy in agriculture in in pesticides
and environmentalism and anything that
was considered a read a restraint on
free corporate trade could be challenged
and I commissioned a study and we found
there were a hundred California laws
some of which had been very involved in
that would be on the block if we
accepted this arrangement and these
tribunals so I went up to say i went up
to yes and yes Seattle and I was tear
gassed I was I had no sense of the
creative militancy of this new
generation of students I'd seen them
percolating up yes in the environmental
movement but this was really an
extraordinary wave of demonstrations
that actually stopped they wanted to end
but they stopped the World Trade
Organization in its tracks and caused a
continuing reconsideration of what we're
doing that is still reflected in today's
presidential debates now I remain our
effective I remember interviewing
interviewing you on the radio right
after those demonstrations and you were
arguing at that point these
demonstrations are better than anything
we did in the 60s I think what I said is
they were bigger than Chicago yeah and
that they they had more immediate more
immediate effect in the sense that they
actually stopped the World Trade
Organization temporarily but they
stopped it from functioning stopped it
from approving all of these onerous
regulations when we tried to stop
segregated lunch counters 30 years
before we did but then they would reopen
and it would be a long long process but
in this case I thought you know when the
when the dust cleared and the smoke
settled and the tear gas was gone people
would look at it more clearly and see
and that a more secretive apparatus the
WTO have been exposed and we had bought
precious time for the American people
and American institutions to consider
what what is our role in the world you
know are we trying to create a corporate
Empire are we trying to roll back
protections on health safety environment
consumer products that were the
achievements of past generations and I
think it was very healthy the Seattle
generation I'm afraid became derailed
somewhat because of Iraq so we won't
know what the Seattle generation would
have become for that brief period though
it was extremely powerful it was global
and it's still around but until Iraq is
really resolved I don't think you'll
find enough attention here the evidence
that it goes on is look at Latin America
eight nine ten elections to the to the
presidency in countries that used to be
under dictatorships that were considered
economic satellites of the United States
whether it's Argentina Brazil Venezuela
or a guai paraguay chill a that the list
goes on these are all countries that
have turned against what was transpiring
in Seattle so it's by no means over and
I went to many of these places I went to
the demonstrations in Miami I went to
Cancun to the next effort at the WTO I
went to Bolivia on a couple of occasions
to investigate the rise of a peasant
movement and the election of the first
indigenous president of that country all
very moving and interesting experiences
that reminded me of Mississippi in the
beginning but now the South was the
whole global south and and it seemed to
me a certain
consistent pattern from the beginning to
the end of my life at least my life so
far your life so far for the last five
years you've been very engaged with the
Iraq war critiquing the Iraq war
organizing against the Iraq war and
writing about the Iraq war I have what
do you see is the key the key issues in
your writing in this period well I think
I can be helpful because of my Vietnam
experience that's why I chose it it
reminds me of the days during Vietnam
when they were there were moderates who
said we can't just leave there's got to
be negotiations now and then there were
people who said no negotiations just get
out and because no one could resolve the
disagreements here the whole business
collapsed horrific Lee and Americans
were leaving on helicopters and genocide
was being committed in Cambodia and so
on so I do think a lot of attention has
to be paid to the the reason why our
government won't leave and more
attention to what does it take for them
to be compelled to leave I happen to
think the election of a new president is
a step but not the only step because
this president wants to continue and to
send it on to the to the to the future
the the key finding is that the the
president's the Congressional people the
the powers that be see themselves as a
superpower as an empire as number one
and like Machiavelli the reputation of
the government the reputation of the
Pentagon is all important so they simply
are unable to consider getting out a
businessman on the other hand it might
very well say who what's wrong with
cutting our losses yeah like they're
used to like leaving control chaos
behind
starting a new enterprise but those who
represent the United States of America
with capital letters think that they're
representing our supremacy and so you
have to find some way to protect their
image to the extent possible while
getting them out and I think the will of
the people as expressed in voting it is
an absolute essential but it's very
revealing that it doesn't seem to be
enough well let's talk about that a
little more of both Democratic
candidates say they want to draw down
troops rapidly they sort of disagree on
how many how soon what's your assessment
of what one more what more you you would
like to see well the difference between
the Republicans and Democrats seems
clear but as many taxi drivers have told
me you should always vote for the guy
that sounds like he's against you
because he'll turn out to be right for
you so you never know really what's
going on here but there seems to be this
sharp difference keep the war going and
the war yeah but in those three words
three little words and the war you find
Hillary Clinton most most of all Barack
Obama somewhat has a a qualifier that
there has to be a residual force for
counterterrorism training Iraqis for
embedding themselves with Iraqis for
advising Iraqis protecting the embassy
and so on and if you total it up you're
talking between 10 and 30 thousand if
you understand that there's a
three-to-one multiplier in terms of the
backup troops you need to support those
troops you are at 50,000 minimum and it
begins to look like counterinsurgency in
Central America not an exit from Iraq
whether this is election hyperbole
whether this is reality is remains to be
seen but but you know my experience is
that
civil society and public opinion and
voters count if only because the
politicians have to come around every
four years and they have to seek seek
our votes and having a mandate for peace
this November just as there was a
mandate for peace in november two
thousand six is a very important
contribution that we can make the rest
is to find ways to compel them to get
out sooner rather than later my worst
estimate is that it will be with us
another five or eight years and I say
that because Dan Ellsberg wrote from his
experience in the Pentagon and with
Pentagon Papers that the purpose of the
executive branch of the establishment is
not to lose and so they will escalate
enough to not lose and pass the poison
pill of the war on to the next
administration who will learn that they
dare not lose and who therefore will do
whatever it takes to keep it going to
pass it on again there has to be an
adult alternative I would say but I
don't know who in our establishment has
the wisdom to see that this actually is
a threat to our democracy and our
standing in the world and it's better to
seize the diplomatic initiative bargain
with Iran talk to the neighboring
countries but you're not going to get
anywhere unless you announce that you
actually plan to leave you're going to
abandon the occupation the UN isn't even
going to support the occupation after
December our allies have virtually all
left the British I think have 1500
outside an air base there's there's not
there's no there there and yet the image
of something there is is what the
president is trying to promote
and you'll notice the Democrats are are
vague Obama's clearest 16-month
withdrawal of combat troops but his
advisers say leave 30,000 behind well
that's up to Iraq my question is from
military point of view would be how
would you do better with 30,000
Americans there if you failed to win
with 150,000 these are questions to take
up next year well Tom I'm sorry we're
out of time thanks for talking with us
today thanks John always